.TH MIDRA 1 "February 2026" "midra" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
midra \- A high-performance, interactive MIDI player for the command line.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B midra
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIFILE\fR...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBmidra\fR (Midiraja) is a lightweight, cross-platform CLI tool for playing MIDI files directly to native OS MIDI synthesizers. It features an interactive UI for port selection, a robust playlist system, and live playback controls.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-p\fR, \fB\-\-port\fR=\fIPORT\fR
MIDI output port index or partial name. If omitted, an interactive menu will be shown.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-volume\fR=\fIVOLUME\fR
Initial volume percentage (0-100). Default is 100.
.TP
\fB\-x\fR, \fB\-\-speed\fR=\fISPEED\fR
Playback speed multiplier (e.g., 1.0, 1.2, 0.5). Default is 1.0.
.TP
\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-\-start\fR=\fITIME\fR
Playback start time for the first track. Format can be HH:MM:SS, MM:SS, or seconds (e.g., 01:10:12, 05:30, or 90).
.TP
\fB\-t\fR, \fB\-\-transpose\fR=\fISEMITONES\fR
Transpose by semitones (e.g., 12 for one octave up, -5 for down).
.TP
\fB\-z\fR, \fB\-\-shuffle\fR
Shuffle the playlist before playing.
.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-loop\fR
Loop the playlist indefinitely. If combined with \fB\-\-shuffle\fR, the playlist is reshuffled on each new loop.
.TP
\fB\-l\fR, \fB\-\-list\fR
List available MIDI output devices and exit.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Show this help message and exit.
.TP
\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
Print version information and exit.
.SH INTERACTIVE CONTROLS
During playback, the following keystrokes are supported to control the engine in real-time:
.TP
\fBUp / Down Arrow\fR
Increase or decrease the master volume by 5%.
.TP
\fBLeft / Right Arrow\fR
Skip backward or forward by approximately 10 seconds.
.TP
\fB+ / \-\fR (or \fB= / _\fR)
Increase or decrease playback speed by 0.1x.
.TP
\fB> / <\fR (or \fB. / ,\fR)
Transpose the key up or down by one semitone.
.TP
\fBn\fR (or \fB]\fR)
Skip to the next track in the playlist.
.TP
\fBp\fR (or \fB[\fR)
Return to the previous track in the playlist.
.TP
\fBq\fR (or \fBESC\fR)
Stop playback and exit the application entirely.
.SH EXAMPLES
Play a single file with an interactive port selection menu:
.RS 4
midra PASSPORT.MID
.RE

Play all MIDI files in a directory continuously in random order:
.RS 4
midra --loop --shuffle *.mid
.RE

Start playback at 1 minute and 30 seconds with 1.5x speed:
.RS 4
midra --start 01:30 --speed 1.5 PASSPORT.MID
.RE
.SH AUTHORS
Midiraja was created to bring high-performance, interactive MIDI playback to the terminal.