.TH MIDRA 1 "March 2026" "midra" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
midra \- A high-performance, interactive MIDI player for the command line.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B midra
[\fICOMMAND\fR] [\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIFILE\fR...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBmidra\fR (Midiraja) is a lightweight, cross-platform CLI tool for playing MIDI files directly to
native OS MIDI synthesizers, built-in retro emulation engines, or dynamically linked C libraries
such as FluidSynth and Munt. It features an interactive TUI with real-time VU meters, live
playback controls, and a modular DSP audio effect rack.
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
\fBopl\fR
OPL2/OPL3 FM synthesis (AdLib / Sound Blaster). Run \fBmidra opl --help\fR for options.
.TP
\fBopn\fR
OPN2 FM synthesis (Sega Genesis / PC-98). Run \fBmidra opn --help\fR for options.
.TP
\fBmunt\fR
Cycle-accurate Roland MT-32/CM-32L emulation via Munt. Requires ROM files.
.TP
\fBfluid\fR
FluidSynth SoundFont (.sf2) playback. Requires FluidSynth installed.
.TP
\fBgus\fR
Gravis Ultrasound DSP wavetable synthesis (.pat patches).
.TP
\fBbeep\fR (alias: \fB1bit\fR)
1-Bit Digital Cluster speaker engine (Apple II / PC Speaker style).
.TP
\fBpsg\fR (alias: \fBmsx\fR)
Programmable Sound Generator (AY-3-8910 / YM2149F) with optional Konami SCC expansion.
.TP
\fBdevice\fR (alias: \fBdev\fR)
Route raw MIDI events to an OS MIDI output port (hardware or virtual).
.TP
\fBports\fR
List available MIDI output devices and exit.
.SH COMMON OPTIONS
These options apply to all subcommands.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-volume\fR=\fIVOLUME\fR
Initial volume percentage (0-100). Default is 100.
.TP
\fB\-x\fR, \fB\-\-speed\fR=\fISPEED\fR
Playback speed multiplier (e.g., 1.0, 1.2, 0.5). Default is 1.0.
.TP
\fB\-S\fR, \fB\-\-start\fR=\fITIME\fR
Playback start time for the first track. Format: HH:MM:SS, MM:SS, or seconds (e.g., 01:10:12, 05:30, or 90).
.TP
\fB\-t\fR, \fB\-\-transpose\fR=\fISEMITONES\fR
Transpose by semitones (e.g., 12 for one octave up, -5 for down).
.TP
\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-\-shuffle\fR
Shuffle the playlist before playing.
.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-loop\fR
Loop the playlist indefinitely.
.TP
\fB\-R\fR, \fB\-\-recursive\fR
Recursively search for MIDI files in given directories.
.TP
\fB\-\-verbose\fR
Show verbose error messages and stack traces.
.TP
\fB\-\-ignore-sysex\fR
Filter out hardware-specific System Exclusive (SysEx) messages.
.TP
\fB\-\-reset\fR=\fITYPE\fR
Send a SysEx reset before each track (gm, gm2, gs, xg, mt32, or raw hex like F0...F7).
.TP
\fB\-\-dump-wav\fR=\fIFILE\fR
Dump the real-time audio output to the specified WAV file.
.SH RETRO HARDWARE SIMULATION
.TP
\fB\-\-retro\fR=\fIMODE\fR
Apply a physically accurate acoustic simulation of retro hardware output. Modes:
.RS 4
\fBcompactmac\fR  \- Macintosh 128K/512K 2-inch mono speaker
.br
\fBpc\fR          \- IBM PC Speaker (15.2kHz PWM, ~6-bit)
.br
\fBapple2\fR      \- Apple II speaker (DAC522 dual-pulse technique, ~5-bit)
.br
\fBspectrum\fR    \- ZX Spectrum 22mm beeper
.br
\fBcovox\fR       \- Covox Speech Thing parallel-port DAC
.br
\fBdisneysound\fR \- Disney Sound Source
.RE
.TP
\fB\-\-speaker\fR=\fIPROFILE\fR
Vintage speaker acoustic simulation (independent of \fB\-\-retro\fR). Profiles:
.RS 4
\fBtin-can\fR    \- Narrow-band, telephone-like mid-forward coloring
.br
\fBwarm-radio\fR \- AM radio warmth with soft bass rolloff
.RE
.SH DSP OPTIONS
These options apply to internal synthesis engines (opl, opn, psg, gus, beep).
.TP
\fB\-\-tube\fR=\fI0-100\fR
Analog tube saturation (harmonic distortion and warmth).
.TP
\fB\-\-chorus\fR=\fI0-100\fR
Stereo chorus effect.
.TP
\fB\-\-reverb\fR=\fIPRESET\fR
Algorithmic reverb. Presets: room, hall, plate, chamber, spring, cave.
.TP
\fB\-\-reverb-level\fR=\fI0-100\fR
Reverb wet/dry mix. Default is 50.
.TP
\fB\-\-bass\fR=\fI0-100\fR
Bass EQ boost/cut (50 = neutral).
.TP
\fB\-\-mid\fR=\fI0-100\fR
Mid EQ boost/cut (50 = neutral).
.TP
\fB\-\-treble\fR=\fI0-100\fR
Treble EQ boost/cut (50 = neutral).
.TP
\fB\-\-lpf\fR=\fIFREQ\fR
Low-pass filter cutoff frequency in Hz.
.TP
\fB\-\-hpf\fR=\fIFREQ\fR
High-pass filter cutoff frequency in Hz.
.SH TUI OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-1\fR, \fB\-\-classic\fR
Classic scrolling console output.
.TP
\fB\-2\fR, \fB\-\-mini\fR
Compact single-line status bar.
.TP
\fB\-3\fR, \fB\-\-full\fR
Full-screen TUI dashboard with VU meters and playlist queue.
.SH INTERACTIVE CONTROLS
During playback, the following keystrokes are supported:
.TP
\fBUp / Down Arrow\fR
Skip to the previous or next track in the playlist.
.TP
\fBLeft / Right Arrow\fR
Seek backward or forward by approximately 10 seconds.
.TP
\fB+ / \-\fR (or \fBu / d\fR)
Increase or decrease the master volume by 5%.
.TP
\fB> / <\fR (or \fB. / ,\fR)
Increase or decrease playback speed by 0.1x.
.TP
\fBn\fR (or \fBp\fR)
Skip to the next or previous track in the playlist (same as arrow keys).
.TP
\fBf\fR (or \fBb\fR)
Seek forward or backward (same as arrow keys).
.TP
\fBSpace\fR
Pause or resume playback.
.TP
\fB1\fR, \fB2\fR, \fB3\fR
Switch TUI display mode (classic, mini, full).
.TP
\fBq\fR (or \fBESC\fR)
Stop playback and exit the application.
.SH EXAMPLES
Play a single file with an interactive port selection menu:
.RS 4
midra PASSPORT.MID
.RE

Play all MIDI files in a directory in random order, looping forever:
.RS 4
midra --loop --shuffle ~/game_music/
.RE

Start playback at 1 minute 30 seconds with 1.5x speed:
.RS 4
midra --start 01:30 --speed 1.5 PASSPORT.MID
.RE

Play using the OPL3 FM engine with the DOOM instrument bank:
.RS 4
midra opl -b 14 song.mid
.RE

Play using Munt MT-32 emulation:
.RS 4
midra munt ~/roms/ monkey_island.mid
.RE

Play using FluidSynth with a SoundFont:
.RS 4
midra fluid ~/soundfonts/gm.sf2 song.mid
.RE

Apply tube saturation and reverb to the OPN2 engine:
.RS 4
midra opn --tube 20 --reverb hall --reverb-level 70 song.mid
.RE

Simulate Compact Mac speaker output:
.RS 4
midra opl --retro compactmac song.mid
.RE
.SH AUTHORS
Midiraja was created by Park, Sungchul. See https://github.com/fupfin/midiraja
